== NLP ==

This is a Chicken Scheme egg which provides a framework for Natural
Language Processing.

It currently provides
 - a means of parsing an arbitrary sentence given a context-free grammar (CFG)
   in the form specified (as shown in an example below).
 - a means of performing theta-role assignment (linking) where
   words/phrases that correspond to participants in the sentence are given
   roles such a agent, patient, etc.

In the future, this should also include
 - a richer grammar with context-sensitive rules
 - bindings to cmu-sphinx for actual speech data

==== High-level ====

:(nlp:parse-sentence sentence cfg)

Parses a given sentence according to the specified CFG and produces a parse
tree tagged with the corresponding part-of-speech from the CFG.

:(nlp:parse-sentence-any sentence cfg)

Where the previous procedure only work for a complete sentence, as mandated by
the CFG, this procedure will produce a parse-tree for phrases and fragments of
sentences.

:(nlp:sentence->participants-and-roles sentence cfg semantics)

Provides an association list of the roles that participants in the sentence are
deemed to be filling. Uses the ''nlp:theta-role-assignment'' procedure to find the
associations from the provided semantics.

=== Examples ===

  (use traversal nondeterminism nlp)
  (define (*example:semantics* lexical-entry)
   (let ((all-roles '(agent patient referent goal source)))
    (case lexical-entry
          ((to-the-left-of) `((agent patient) (referent)))
          ((to-the-right-of) `((agent patient) (referent)))
          ((picked-up) `((agent) (patient)))
          ((put-down) `((agent) (patient)))
          ((carried) `((agent) (patient)))
          ((approached) `((agent) (goal)))
          ((towards) `((agent patient) (goal)))
          ((away-from) `((agent patient) (source)))
          (else `(,all-roles)))))
  (define *example:cfg*
   (create-cfg
    (list (make-production-rule 'S '(NP VP))
          (make-production-rule 'NP '(D (A) N (PP)))
          (make-production-rule 'D '(an))
          (make-production-rule 'D '(the))
          (make-production-rule 'A '(blue))
          (make-production-rule 'A '(red))
          (make-production-rule 'N '(person))
          (make-production-rule 'N '(backpack))
          (make-production-rule 'N '(trash-can))
          (make-production-rule 'N '(chair))
          (make-production-rule 'N '(object))
          (make-production-rule 'PP '(P NP))
          (make-production-rule 'P '(to the left of))
          (make-production-rule 'P '(to the right of))
          (make-production-rule 'VP '(V NP (ADV) (PPM)))
          (make-production-rule 'V '(picked up))
          (make-production-rule 'V '(put down))
          (make-production-rule 'V '(carried))
          (make-production-rule 'V '(approached))
          (make-production-rule 'ADV '(quickly))
          (make-production-rule 'ADV '(slowly))
          (make-production-rule 'PPM '(PM NP))
          (make-production-rule 'PM '(towards))
          (make-production-rule 'PM '(away from)))))
  (sentence:parse-sentence
    "The person to the left of the backpack approached the trash-can"
    *example:cfg*)
  (sentence:parse-sentence-any
    "carried the chair"
    *example:cfg*)
  (sentence->roles-and-participants
    "The person to the left of the backpack approached the trash-can"
    *example:cfg*
    *example:semantics*)

=== License ===

   Copyright 2002-2013 Purdue University. All rights reserved.

   Contact Siddharth Narayanaswamy, siddharth@iffsid.com.

   This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
   it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by
   the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
   (at your option) any later version.
   This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
   but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
   GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.
   You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License
   along with this program.  If not, see http://www.gnu.org/licenses.
__NOTOC__
